Update E2E tests page (#17)
U8NWXD/oppia-wiki: End-to-End-Tests.md

    * Test everything from the user's perspective. For example, instead of jumping to a page by the URL, navigate to the page using the links on the webpage like a user would.
    * Check the "happy paths" where the user does what you expect.
    * Check the "unhappy paths" where the user does something wrong. For example, if a text field only accepts 30 characters, your test should try entering 31 characters to make sure the appropriate error messages appear.
    * E2E tests are relatively "expensive," meaning that they take a while to run. Therefore, you should avoid testing something twice wherever possible. This usually means that fewer, larger tests are preferable to more, smaller tests. For example, consider these tests:

      * Test exploration creation by creating a new exploration.
      * Test exploration deletion by creating a new exploration and then deleting it.

      Notice that we create an exploration in both tests. It would be more efficient to combine these into a single test:

      * Test exploration creation and deletion by creating an exploration and then deleting it.

> 2. Write the [utilities](#writing-utilities) you will need. Your test file should never interact with the page directly. All interactions should go through utilities. A good way to check that you're doing all page interactions through the utilities is to ensure that you have no element selectors (e.g. `element(by.css(...))`) in your suite files.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Write the [utilities](#writing-utilities) you will need. Your test file should never interact with the page directly. Use utilities instead. A good way to check that you're doing all page interactions through the utilities is to ensure that you have no element selectors (e.g. `element(by.css(...))`) in your suite files.
```

### Writing utilities

#### Selecting elements

Much of the difficulty of writing protractor code lies in specifying the element with which you wish to interact. It is important to do so in a way that is as insensitive as possible to superficial DOM features such as text and styling, so as to reduce the likelihood that the test will break when the production html is changed. Here are some ways to specify an element, in order of decreasing preference:

1. Adding a `protractor-test-some-name` class to the element in question, and then referencing it by `by.css('.protractor-test-some-name')`. We do not use `by.id` for this purpose because Oppia frequently displays multiple copies of a DOM element on the same page, and if an `id` is repeated then references to it will not work properly. This is the preferred method, since it makes clear to those editing production code exactly what the dependence on protractor is, thus minimising the likelihood of confusing errors when they make changes. Sometimes this may not work, though (e.g. for embedded pages, third-party libraries and generated HTML), in which case you may instead need to use one of the options below.

> 2. Existing element ids, for example `explorationLanguageCode`. We avoid using existing classes for this purpose as they are generally style specifications such as `big-button` that may be changed in the future.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Using existing element ids, for example `explorationLanguageCode`. We avoid using existing classes for this purpose as they are generally style specifications such as `big-button` that may be changed in the future.
```

> 3. You can use `by.tagName` if you are sure you are in a context where only one element will have (or is likely to have in future) the given name. The `<input>` and `<button>` tags often fall under this category. Try to avoid `by.buttonText` and `by.linkText` since they are sensitive to the choice of user-facing text.

Author: ```suggestion
3. You can use `by.tagName` if you are sure you are in a context where only one element will have (and is likely to have in future) the given name. The `<input>` and `<button>` tags often fall under this category. Try to avoid `by.buttonText` and `by.linkText` since they are sensitive to the choice of user-facing text.
```

> 4. Finally, you can use `by.xpath` to specify an exact path from the starting element to the one you get to. This is not ideal since it renders the tests fragile to changes in the DOM. However sometimes it is necessary, for example to send elements to `expectRichText` in `forms.js` which requires it receive an exact element that cannot be directly specified.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Finally, you can use `by.xpath` to specify an exact path from the starting element to the one you get to. This is not ideal since it renders the tests fragile to changes in the DOM.
```

If you use one of options 2-4, you should create a chain of element selectors where the top of the chain uses option 1. Suppose we have a DOM like this:

```text

       Root
       /  \
      /   ...
     /      \
         Element A: class="protractor-test-elem-a"
             \

>     ...      ...

Author: Fix left `...`

            /  \
           ...  \
                 \
              Element B: id="elem-b"
```

Then you can select Element B with this selector chain:

```js
var elemB = element(by.css('.protractor-test-elem-a')).element(by.id('elem-b'));
```

Notice that the top of the chain, where we select Element A, uses method 1.

Sometimes you need to distinguish between several different elements which all look the same to element selectors. You can iterate over all the elements to find the right one. For example, suppose we want to click on the button to open a topic, where the button text is the topic name. We could find the right button like this:

```js
var buttons = element.all(by.css('.protractor-test-button'));
...
var openTopic = async function(topicName) {
  await waitFor.elementToBeClickable(
    buttons.first(),
    'Topic buttons taking too long to become clickable.'
  );
  for (i = 0; i < buttons.count(); i++) {
    var button = buttons.get(i);
    var buttonText = await action.getText(
      `Topic button ${i}`, button);
    if (buttonText === topicName) {
      await action.click('Topic button ${i}', button);
      return True;
    }
  }
  return False;
}
```

> It might be tempting to use the `.first()`, `.last()`, and `.get(n)` functions directly when you know what order the elements will come in. However, this makes the tests fragile to changes in the page, and it makes the code hard to read. You should also avoid accessing page elements by index since that's not how most users will find elements. They will be relying on the text identifying those elements, and your test should too.

Author: ```suggestion
It might be tempting to use the `.first()`, `.last()`, and `.get(n)` functions directly when you know what order the elements will come in. However, this makes the tests fragile to changes in the page, and it makes the code hard to read. You should also avoid accessing page elements by index because that's not how most users will find elements. They will be relying on the text identifying those elements, and your test should too.
```

#### Non-Angular pages

All the protractor code assumes you are working in an Angular webpage. If you need to move to non-Angular context (for example in an iframe) then look at the login function of `users.js` or the `embedding.js` test for examples of how to proceed.

### Writing robust tests

#### Flakiness

It is easy to accidentally write _flaky_ end-to-end tests, which means that the tests sometimes pass and sometimes fail for non-deterministic reasons. For example, you might write a test assuming that all the elements of the page load at once. However, you have probably noticed that when your browser slows down, it sometimes loads parts of the page before others. This could lead your test to fail randomly, which is called flaking. Here are some tips for avoiding flakiness in your tests:

* HTML tags should be unique if possible. When they are not unique, for instance when multiple copies of the same HTML are created dynamically, we should not find one with indexing, `.first()`, or `.last()`. A great example of how to do this correctly is in `this.playTutorial` in `ExplorationEditorMainTab.js`.

>   * There is really only one case where it is acceptable to identify HTML elements by index, which is when the following conditions all hold:

Author: ```suggestion
  There is really only one case where it is acceptable to identify HTML elements by index, which is when the following conditions all hold:
```

    1. The elements you want to choose among are siblings, meaning that they share the same parent element. If they aren't siblings, then you can add use the parent elements to distinguish between them, for example by adding HTML classes to the parents.
    2. The elements you want to choose among are identical. In particular, if the elements contain different text, then you can use that text to distinguish them.
    3. The elements you want to choose among are generated dynamically, so you can't modify them to add HTML classes.

* Avoid for loops where the loop index is used in asynchronous calls. `this.expectHintsTabContentsToMatch` in `ExplorationEditorTranslationTab.js` is a better way because it puts the index in the CSS selector, so the index is used before the asynchronous part kicks in.

* Do not use URLs to navigate to a page, for example opening the about page by navigating to `/about` instead of clicking the appropriate buttons

> * Do not use `browser.sleep(` calls. This is great for debugging, but in the final test you should use `waitFor` instead.

Author: ```suggestion
* Do not use `browser.sleep()` calls. They are fine for debugging, but in the final test you should use `waitFor` instead.
```

```text
               <---A--->

                        +-------+
                        | Modal |
+----------+   +---//---+ opens +-----------+
| Click to |   |        +-------+           |
| open     +---+                            +---->
| modal    |   |        +-------------+     |
+----------+   +---//---+ Click to    +-----+
                        | close modal |
                        +-------------+

               <---B--->

--------------------- time ---------------------->
```

The durations of steps `A` and `B` are non-deterministic because `A` depends on how quickly the browser executes the frontend code to open the modal, and `B` depends on how fast the test code runs. Since these operations are happening on separate processes, the operating system makes no guarantees about which will complete first. In other words, we have a race condition.

> This race condition means that the test can fail randomly even when there's nothing wrong with Oppia's code. These failures are called _flakes_.

Author: done

```js
var buttons = element.all(by.css('.protractor-test-button'));
...
var openTopic = async function(topicName) {
  await waitFor.elementToBeClickable(
    buttons.first(),
    'Topic buttons taking too long to become clickable.'
  );
  for (i = 0; i < buttons.count(); i++) {
    var button = buttons.get(i);
    var buttonText = await action.getText(
      `Topic button ${i}`, button);
    if (buttonText === topicName) {
      await action.click('Topic button ${i}', button);
      return True;
    }
  }
  return False;
}
```

It might be tempting to use the `.first()`, `.last()`, and `.get(n)` functions directly when you know what order the elements will come in. However, this makes the tests fragile to changes in the page, and it makes the code hard to read. You should also avoid accessing page elements by index because that's not how most users will find elements. They will be relying on the text identifying those elements, and your test should too.

> Except for cases where an element selector is crafted dynamically, all element selectors should be at the top of a utility file. There should be no element selectors in suite files.

Reviewer: I just realized that "utility file" is not defined, and there is no mention of pageobjects anywhere. This seems like an omission? The separation of concerns seems important to understanding where to put what, and why we lay things out that way.

Author: done

   await adminPage.viewRolesbyUsername('moderator1');
   ...
   ```

> 2. Run the e2e script with the flag --debug_mode. For example,

Author: ```suggestion
2. Run the e2e script with the flag `--debug_mode`. For example,
```

   ```console
   python -m scripts.run_e2e_tests --debug_mode --suite="topicAndStoryEditor"
   ```

3. Wait for the script to show the following log:

   ```text
   Debugger listening on ws://127.0.0.1:9229/e4779cc6-72e9-4d8d-889e-1fb3b2628781
   For help, see: https://nodejs.org/en/docs/inspector
   ```

4. At this point, go to `chrome://inspect/#devices` on your Chrome browser.

5. Click on "inspect" under Remote Target (see screenshot below).

   ![Inspect Page](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11008603/88563290-714bac80-d04f-11ea-8b36-fc43c66d6e3d.png)

6. A Chrome dev tools instance will open up and the e2e test should start executing in a new window.

7. The control will stop at the point where the debugger statement was added. You can now choose to inspect elements, log variables in the test, or add more break-points.

### Rerunning with SSH

> Circle CI allows debugging using SSH. For details, please read [this](https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/ssh-access-jobs/#steps). Debugging with SSH only reruns that particular job, so it is a great way to rerun a passing test to see if it flakes without rerunning all the tests.

Author: Circle CI -> CircleCI

ditto elsewhere

Sometimes you'll get screenshots that just aren't very helpful. For example, a lot of screenshots show the login page for some reason. You can check other examples of a flake though. One of the others might have a useful screenshot.

### Downloading screen recordings

> When screen recordings are enabled, we capture video of the test running on GitHub Actions. This helps developers solve problems in E2E tests that only occur on CI or are difficult to replicate locally.

Reviewer: Link this to an explanation for how to enable?

Author: I clarified the later paragraph that describes when recordings are generated

Reviewer: Yup, but what I'm trying to point out is that the main thing developers are going to look for when reading this section is "how do I get screen recordings for my currently-failing test". I think it might be worth having that really clear and front-and-center, rather than just a description of what the system currently is.

More generally, you might want a step-by-step list somewhere of "these are the steps you should take when debugging an e2e test" (one of which presumably involves getting screen recordings).

Author: Ahh, that makes sense. done

![Artifacts section in summary of e2e run](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/52176783/118647358-502c9600-b7f2-11eb-9e41-a6f5f962ddfb.png)

Note for macOS: Quicktime doesn’t seem to like the videos we generate, so you might need to use VLC media player to view the videos.

## Metrics

We track passes, known flakes, and failures that aren't known to be flakes (called "failures") using a logging server. You can view these metrics at https://oppia-e2e-test-results-logger.herokuapp.com. The code for this server is in the (private) [`oppia/oppia-e2e-test-results-logger`](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-e2e-test-restuls-logger) repository.

## Reference

> ### Forms and Objects

Author: ```suggestion
### Forms and objects
```

![Name of video for test gets printed out above test](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/52176783/118647333-486cf180-b7f2-11eb-999b-9edbbb89b5a7.png)

> Note that while recordings are enabled by default, no videos will be generated on CircleCI due to memory issues when running the video recorder. Further, videos are disabled on GitHub Actions where the `VIDEO_RECORDING_IS_ENABLED` environment variable is set to `0`.

Reviewer: >> Link this to an explanation for how to enable?
> 
> I clarified the later paragraph that describes when recordings are generated

It seems that it is 0 for everything at the moment, so I'm not sure this counts as "recordings enabled by default".

Author: By "default" I meant that recordings will be saved so long as the environment variable is not set to 0. However, that's not actually correct--the environment variable has to be set to 1 for videos to be saved. I've updated the wiki page to reflect that

![Artifacts section in summary of e2e run](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/52176783/118647358-502c9600-b7f2-11eb-9e41-a6f5f962ddfb.png)

Note for macOS: Quicktime doesn’t seem to like the videos we generate, so you might need to use VLC media player to view the videos.

## Metrics

> We track passes, known flakes, and failures that aren't known to be flakes (called "failures") using a logging server. You can view these metrics at https://oppia-e2e-test-results-logger.herokuapp.com. The code for this server is in the (private) [`oppia/oppia-e2e-test-results-logger`](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-e2e-test-restuls-logger) repository.

Reviewer: Is it useful to add the last sentence? If so should we explain why it's private?

I lean slightly towards omitting it since it's not actually that useful, but your call.

Author: removed

>   var output = await someAsynchronousFunction();

Author: Above, add languages to code blocks in async-await tips

>   await // do something with "output"

Author: Above, no `i` in `.first()` and `.last()`
